### Introduction

A **craftsman** is a person who is highly skilled at a particular task whereby they understand their tools well. In the programming world, it's no different,  a good programmer is often compared to a craftsman. Just as a craftsman uses their knowledge, experience, and tools to create something of value, a good programmer applies their technical expertise to build software. However, there is one aspect of software development that is often overlooked and underrated, yet crucial to the success of any project: low-level programming languages. These languages provide a level of control and efficiency that is unmatched by higher-level languages, such as Python or Java. For example, low-level languages allow developers to directly manipulate hardware, which is essential for building high-performance systems. Additionally, low-level languages are closer to the machine, making it easier to debug and optimize code, resulting in better performance and reduced memory usage.

### Low level languages
I learnt about this when I started doing Web Programming back in 2018. I started with the basics; HTML , CSS and a little bit of JavaScript all of which at first, were easy to grasp. I wanted to do more, so I dived deeper into learning JavaScript(NodeJs, Angular2) and Python(Flask). While at it, everything was everywhere; the googling, the tutorials among other online resources that were available. There was too much to learn and everything started to become overwhelming, I was straining alot, I almost gave up. Few weeks later, I came across a shared post from the [Lakehub](https://www.facebook.com/LakeHub/) Facebook page about a scholarship program [GADS](https://www.pluralsight.com/partners/google/africa/gads-2022 "Google Africa Developers Scholarship") from [ALC](https://andela.com/learning-community/ "Andela Learning Community") partnering with Google and [Pluralsight](https://app.pluralsight.com/). I applied and got accepted. I chose the **Web Track** and kept learning Angular2, NodeJs and Bootstrap among other courses. I managed to advance up to the project phase. After the program, I could build simple web apps, I built an [Album Store](),  [Weather App]() and a [Kanban App]() but still I felt like something was still missing, I was still struggling a lot to understand some basic stuff. I relied on online tutorials and honestly, they were killing me.

During the GADS program period, I got a chance to attend physical/online meetups, DevFest and other tech meetups. It was full of amazing people, it was fun. I got the opportunity to meet my mentors; [Sigu](https://twitter.com/s_igu "Sigu Magwa"), [Alela](https://twitter.com/DeniseAllela "Denise Alela"), [Okoth](https://twitter.com/okothkongo "Okoth Kongo"). They made me fall in love with the C language. In one of the physical meetups, they would mention the importance of low level programming languages, how useful they are despite us ignoring them. It hit me hard, so I decided to slow down a little and started learning C programming alongside JavaScript and Python. I started small, learning the C language. I joined [CS50: Harvard University’s introduction to the intellectual enterprises of computer science and the art of programming](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2023/) and [CS61: Systems Programming and Machine Organization](https://cs61.seas.harvard.edu/site/2021/). I learnt about memory management, how the compiler turns programming language into instructions and socket programming in C among others. I got a deeper understanding of how computers work as well as the underlying systems and processes that make software possible. This understanding allowed me to make informed decisions about how to design, build, and optimize my code for maximum performance and efficiency.

Currently, many programs are written in high level programming languages which involves bringing together the already existing components to build up a complete system. This means that a good programmer must have a solid understanding of low-level programming languages. This is because low-level languages are essential for building the foundation of any software system, and they provide a level of control and efficiency that is unmatched by higher-level languages. By understanding the low-level details of software development, programmers can create more robust and scalable systems that meet the demands of their clients.

### Conclusion

What can I say? I’m not where I want to be, but I am also not where I was. Right now things are getting quite easy. I’m doing well with JavaScript and Python. Everything is now making sense. At least, I can now break it down and build it up. Learning C and C++ was the best thing that ever happened to me in programming. It made me realize that  to become a better programmer, one needs to understand the internal organization of a computer and besides using the tools (technologies), one needs to understand them well enough.
